Accountability feature (#81)
autonity/docs.autonity.org: content/docs/concepts/staking/_index.md

Staking is open - any network participant is able to purchase stake token and bond stake by [delegation](/glossary/#delegation) to validators. 

Staking rewards are distributed to [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake that is actively backing consensus. That is, to the subset of validator nodes participating in the [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee). Stake delegators to committee member validators receive a share of those rewards in proportion _pro rata_ to their share of the stake bonded to the committee.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

> Note that in Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model, validator [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake does _not_ result in minting of liquid newton or earn staking rewards. Validator revenue is derived from commission, block proposal, and slashing rewards. See [validator economics](/concepts/validator/#validator-economics).

Reviewer: > stake does _not_ result in minting of liquid newton or earn staking rewards. Validator revenue is derived from commission, block proposal, and slashing rewards

See the `_selfReward` variable here https://github.com/autonity/autonity/blob/8183c96276bfc0764ad59b31cde423d6245329c0/autonity/solidity/contracts/Autonity.sol#L931

selfBonded stake does not generate LNTN but still gives you rewards. I saw in other places it is correct but here it is obsolete

Author: Yes. Corrected to:

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
Note that in Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model, validator [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake does _not_ result in minting of liquid newton. Validator revenue is derived from commission, block proposal, staking rewards on self-bonded stake, and slashing rewards. See [validator economics](/concepts/validator/#validator-economics).
{{% /alert %}}

Author: Commit 2401d40bc56baeb2145b5857c022b9a41d88eefb

> Note that in Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model, validator [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake does _not_ result in minting of liquid newton. Validator revenue is derived from commission, block proposal, staking rewards on self-bonded stake, and slashing rewards. See [validator economics](/concepts/validator/#validator-economics).

Reviewer 2: Be consistent with at least the conventions in the same page:

```suggestion
Note that in Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model, validator [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake does _not_ result in minting of Liquid Newton. Validator revenue is derived from commission, block proposal, staking rewards on self-bonded stake, and slashing rewards. See [validator economics](/concepts/validator/#validator-economics).
```

{{% /alert %}}

## Liquid staking

Autonity implements a liquid staking model, bringing benefits of:

> - Capital efficiency: rewards from staking combined with the liquidity benefits of bonded stake that is transferable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Capital efficiency: rewards from staking combined with the liquidity benefits of bonded stake that is transferable
```

> - Composability: liquid stake tokens can be used in other protocols (e.g., as collateral).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Composability: liquid stake tokens can be used in other protocols (e.g., as collateral)
```

### Liquid Newton

Liquid Newton is minted for [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) Newton stake bonded to a validator. On registration each validator has an ERC20 Liquid Newton contract created and deployed autonomously by the Autonity Protocol Contract (which maintains a registry of all Liquid Newton token contracts deployed).

> It is important to note that stake bonded by the validator operator to its own validator - [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake - does _not_ result in minting of Liquid Newton. This is because of the [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.

Reviewer 2: The explanation here is not the most helpful, the reason is by design not because of some cause-and-effect relationship:

```suggestion
It is important to note that stake bonded by the validator operator to its own validator - [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake - does _not_ result in minting of Liquid Newton. This is part of Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.
```

When [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake is bonded to a validator, Liquid Newton is minted for the Newton staked and the staked Newton is locked. The amount of Liquid Newton minted is subject to the amount of delegated stake the validator has at the time the bonding is applied. This conversion rate between Liquid Newton and Newton is maintained by a validator's Liquid Newton contract as the reference price for Newton bonding and unbonding operations. The  rate is determined by the ratio of issued liquid tokens over the total amount of stake tokens bonded to the validator.
             
As consequence, the Liquid Newton minted is subject to any accountability and omissions penalties applied to the validator resulting in a stake slashing event:

- If at the time of bonding a validator's [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake amount _has not_ been reduced by a stake slashing event, then Liquid Newton is minted `1:1` for the [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) Newton staked.

> - However, if the validator's existing [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake amount is less than the supply of issued Liquid Newton, then Liquid Newton is minted in proportion to the validator's [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake remaining, resulting in a `>1:1` issuance of Liquid Newton for Newton staked

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- However, if the validator's existing [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake amount is less than the supply of issued Liquid Newton, then Liquid Newton is minted in proportion to the validator's [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake remaining, resulting in a `>1:1` issuance of Liquid Newton for Newton staked.
```

> This tokenomic mechanism ensures that a validator's Liquid Newton tokens remain fungible as they are issued over time: the amount of Liquid Newton issued on bonding has value matching that of the Newton being bonded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tokenomic mechanism ensures that a validator's Liquid Newton tokens remain fungible as they are issued over time: the amount of Liquid Newton issued on bonding has a value matching that of the Newton being bonded.
```

> Liquid Newton has fundamental operations for:

Reviewer 2: This section "Fundamental operations" is written as a nested list. Nested lists should not be used to explain the logic or structure of a system, because that it is not what they are designed for, or what they are effective at communicating. Rather, they are designed to convey _something that has the form of a list_.

The operations of Liquid Newton can be seen as something that has the form of a list, so this makes sense. But there is no need for the nesting in "Upon receipt". In addition, the effects of unbonding do not belong in this list, it is a different object.

So the section could be written more clearly in flatter way (by no means the only section that can benefit from a restructure, but it does stand out), with at least some content in paragraph form.

Also, the punctuation needs to be reviewed in this section.

Author: Restructured and listing replaced by paragraphs in commit 7bab79cc027ed7fb880aed41dc3126052a98ce63

- Transfer: the holder can transfer ownership by sending to another network participant.

>   - Upon receipt of liquid newton the holder becomes a delegator to the associated validator, and has a claim to some staked newton.

Reviewer 2: Again, consistency with conventions in place:

```suggestion
  - Upon receipt of Liquid Newton the holder becomes a delegator to the associated validator, and has a claim to some staked Newton.
```

- Redemption by unbonding: the holder can unbond stake from a validator and redeem for Newton stake token at any time subject to the unbonding period set for the chain. On unbonding:

>   - Liquid Newton is burned for [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake unbonding

Reviewer: The LNTN is now locked first and then burned. Is this addressed in https://github.com/autonity/docs.autonity.org/pull/93 ?

Author: Yes, I made several edits for that change in the PR. This and the following bullet point now read in that PR:

>  - Liquid Newton is locked then burned for [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake unbonding
>  - the bonded stake remains locked for the duration of an [unbonding period](/glossary/#unbonding-period) during which it is not transferrable and remains subject to any [slashing penalties](/glossary/#slashing-penalty) applied to the validator in that period.

  - the bonded stake remains locked for the duration of an [unbonding period](/glossary/#unbonding-period) during which it is not transferrable and remains subject to any [slashing penalties](/glossary/#slashing-penalty) applied to the validator in that period. 
  
Stake redemption takes place at the end of the epoch in which the unbonding period falls. At this point the validator's stake pool is reduced by the unbonded amount and Newton is returned to the staker.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}It's important to note that Liquid Newton is validator-specific and as such is not 1:1 fungible with Liquid Newton bonded to a different validator. A validator may or may not have had [slashing penalties](/glossary/#slashing-penalty) applied and the redemption value of Liquid Newton may vary across validators according to their fault slashing history.{{% /alert %}}

### Transferring Liquid Newton

For details on how to transfer Liquid Newton from a stake delegation to another account, see:

- How to [Transfer Liquid Newton](/delegators/transfer-lntn/).

## Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)

> Autonity implements a [_penalty absorbing stake (PAS)_](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model where validator [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed in priority to [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake when applying [slashing penalties](/glossary/#slashing-penalty) for accountability events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Autonity implements a [_penalty absorbing stake (PAS)_](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model where a validator's [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed before [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake when applying [slashing penalties](/glossary/#slashing-penalty) for accountability events.
```

Slashing priority is simply:

> - [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed as first priority until exhausted

Reviewer: Maybe we should mention that `selfUnbondingStake` has priority over `SelfBonded`.

Instead slashing of delegated stake is divided pro rata between the unbonding one and the "non-unbonding" one.

Author: OK, I've edited this paragraph and bullet points to make this clear:

>Slashing priority is simply:
>
>- [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed as first priority until exhausted. If the validator has unbonding stake, then the unbonding stake is slashed first before bonded stake.
>- [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake is slashed as second priority when the slashing amount exceeds the amount of self-bonded stake available. If the delegator has unbonding stake, then the unbonding stake and bonded stake are slashed _pro rata_ with equal priority.

I think that states it as simply as possible.

Author: See commit 2401d40bc56baeb2145b5857c022b9a41d88eefb

> - [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake is slashed as second priority when the slashing amount exceeds the amount of self-bonded stake available. If the delegator has unbonding stake, then the unbonding stake and bonded stake are slashed _pro rata_ with equal priority.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed as a first priority until exhausted. If the validator has unbonding stake, then the unbonding stake is slashed before bonded stake.
- [Delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake is slashed as a second priority when the slashing amount exceeds the amount of self-bonded stake available. If the delegator has unbonding stake, then the unbonding stake and bonded stake are slashed _pro rata_ with equal priority.
```

> In the PAS model self-bonded stake has a different risk profile to delegated stake _because it provides loss absorbing capital in the case of a slashing event_. For this reason, Liquid Newton is only minted for delegated stake to ensure validator liquid newton has a uniform risk profile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the PAS model self-bonded stake has a different risk profile to delegated stake _because it provides loss absorbing capital in the case of a slashing event_. For this reason, Liquid Newton is only minted for delegated stake to ensure validator Liquid Newton has a uniform risk profile.
```

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

> Self-bonding stake by a validator puts "skin in the game" and is a public commitment to the operational integrity of a validator node by a validator operator. Potential stake delegators can use the amount of self-bonded stake of a validator as a decision factor when conducting due diligence before staking.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By self-bonding stake, a validator puts "skin in the game" because this constitutes a public commitment to the operational integrity of the validator node by its operator. Potential stake delegators can use the amount of self-bonded stake of a validator as a decision factor when conducting due diligence before staking.
```

{{% /alert %}}

## Staking rewards

Staking rewards are a distribution of fee revenue entitlement to all holders of bonded stake actively backing consensus. Reward distribution takes place _pro-rata_ to the share of total stake bonded to validators in the consensus committee. The fee revenue comes from the _base fees_ charged for computing transactions included in blocks committed to the system ledger. The optional _priority fee_ of a transaction is not included in the rewards pool but awarded to the block proposer according to the EIP 1559 transaction fee mechanism.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
For more detail on EIP 1559 and the distinction between _base fee_ and _priority fee_, see [Transaction fees](/concepts/system-model/#transaction-fees) in the System model.
{{% /alert %}}

> Staking rewards are collected by protocol and accumulate in a protocol account as blocks are processed throughout a block epoch. The fees are out of circulation until epoch end, at which point the protocol distributes them to validator committee members. Rewards are then distributed to validator self-bonded and delegated stake holders _pro rata_ to their share of the validator's total bonded stake. After this distribution, the rewards become _claimable_ by stake delegators. Delegators then [claim rewards](/concepts/staking/#claiming-rewards) in a "pull" model, at the frequency they choose. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Staking rewards are collected by the protocol and accumulate in a protocol account as blocks are processed throughout a block epoch. The fees are out of circulation until epoch end, at which point the protocol distributes them to validator committee members. Rewards are then distributed to validator self-bonded and delegated stake holders _pro rata_ to their share of the validator's total bonded stake. After this distribution, the rewards become _claimable_ by stake delegators. Delegators then [claim rewards](/concepts/staking/#claiming-rewards) in a "pull" model, at the frequency they choose. 
```

As rewards are distributed, due fees are deducted from fee revenue by the protocol:

- Protocol treasury fee. A percentage of staking rewards is deducted for community funding. The fee goes to the Autonity Treasury account (See below), sent at epoch end when the epoch rewards are distributed to committee validators. The percentage value is set at genesis.  See `treasuryFee` parameter of the `config.autonity` object in the [Protocol](/reference/protocol#configautonity-object) section.

> - Validator commission fees. The percentage commission rate charged by a validator to stakers delegating to the validator; essentially, the validator's service fee for providing a staking service to delegators. The fee is deducted from the validator's portion of the fee revenue before staking rewards are apportioned to the stake delegators _pro rata_ to their share of bonded stake. The percentage value is set at validator registration. See `delegationRate` parameter of the `config.autonity` object in the [Protocol](/reference/protocol#configautonity-object) section.

Reviewer 2: It's either:

- see the X parameter in...
- see X in...

But not:

- see X parameter in...

```suggestion
- Validator commission fees. The percentage commission rate charged by a validator to stakers delegating to the validator; essentially, the validator's service fee for providing a staking service to delegators. The fee is deducted from the validator's portion of the fee revenue before staking rewards are apportioned to the stake delegators _pro rata_ to their share of bonded stake. The percentage value is set at validator registration. See the `delegationRate` parameter of the `config.autonity` object in the [Protocol](/reference/protocol#configautonity-object) section.
```

The remaining fee revenue is then distributed to stake delegators. 

### Reward distribution

The _priority fee_ reward is distributed to the validator proposing the block each block.

> Stake delegation rewards are distributed to validator committee members at each block epoch end, at which point they become claimable by stake delegators.

Reviewer 2: "block epoch end", is this right?

Author: That is correct, but the wording is clumsy.  Reworded in commit f2662cb6399adf11c7e0ef6a151a30ca9e667c1b to:

>Stake delegation rewards are distributed to validator committee members at the end of each epoch. On finalization of the last block in the epoch rewards become claimable by stake delegators.

Reviewer 2: Can we also reword the last part of this:

> The priority fee reward is distributed to the validator proposing the block each block.

"the block each block"

Author: I've reworded this to:

>The _priority fee_ reward is distributed to the validator proposing a block when the block is finalized.

Commit: b248094eb28f21c1d4cfd82be33257d6484b34be.

Reviewer 2: Great!

- How to [Claim Staking Rewards](/delegators/claim-rewards/).

## Staking accounts

The protocol makes use of different accounts for fee revenue collection and distribution.

### Staker account

> The `account` address submitting a bond or unbonding request. A staker can bond stake across as many validators as it chooses. The `msg.sender` address of the request is (a) the account that receives the staker's due share of staking reward entitlements, and (b) determines if the stake is [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) or [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded):

Reviewer 2: The use of references (a) and (b) here doesn't enhance explanatory value or serve any useful function (the references aren't used later in the document), and so should be removed _because this meets the criteria for the what constitutes noise_.

```suggestion
The `account` address submitting a bond or unbonding request. A staker can bond stake across as many validators as it chooses. The `msg.sender` address of the request is the account that receives the staker's due share of staking reward entitlements, and determines if the stake is [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) or [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded):
```

- [delegated](/glossary/#delegated): `msg.sender` = any network [account](/glossary/#account) _except_ the validator `treasury` account

> - [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded): `msg.sender` = [validator `treasury` account](/concepts/staking/#validator-treasury-account)

Reviewer 2: A table would be more effective here

Author: This has been moved into a table in commit 7bab79cc027ed7fb880aed41dc3126052a98ce63.

Reviewer 2: Nice

### Validator treasury account

The validator operator's account address. The `treasury` is used as the account:

- Identifying the validator operator entity itself.
- For submitting transactions to protocol contracts to register and operate the validator's [node](/concepts/client/) and [oracle server](/concepts/oracle-server/).
- The `treasury` account for:
  - Receiving [staking rewards](/concepts/staking/#staking-rewards) from the protocol's reward distribution mechanism for distribution to the validator's stake delegators.

>   - Receiving [slashing rewards](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-rewards) distributed by the [accountability and fault detection protocol](/concepts/accountability/) for reporting provable faults committed by an offending validator failing to follow consensus rules.

Reviewer 2: I think there is unnecessary repetition and indentation here, let me know in case I missed something:

```suggestion
The validator operator's account address. The `treasury` is used as the account:

- Identifying the validator operator entity itself.
- For submitting transactions to protocol contracts to register and operate the validator's [node](/concepts/client/) and [oracle server](/concepts/oracle-server/).
- Receiving [staking rewards](/concepts/staking/#staking-rewards) from the protocol's reward distribution mechanism for distribution to the validator's stake delegators.
- Receiving [slashing rewards](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-rewards) distributed by the [accountability and fault detection protocol](/concepts/accountability/) for reporting provable faults committed by an offending validator failing to follow consensus rules.
```

> See `treasury` parameter of the `config.autonity.validators` object in the [Protocol](/reference/protocol#configautonityvalidators-object) parameter reference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the `treasury` parameter of the `config.autonity.validators` object in the [Protocol](/reference/protocol#configautonityvalidators-object) parameter reference.
```

### Autonity treasury account

The Autonity Protocol's `treasury` account for receiving treasury fees. See `treasury` parameter of the 
`autonity.treasury` object in the [Protocol](/reference/protocol#configautonity-object) parameter reference.	
### Autonity Protocol Contract account

The Autonity Protocol's contract account for holding staking rewards (serving as a 'rewards pool') until reward distribution occurs at epoch end. 

> The Autonity Contract account is generated automatically on deployment of the Autonity Protocol Contract at network genesis. See [Protocal Contract Addresses](/concepts/architecture/#protocol-contract-account-addresses) for the address value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Autonity Contract account is generated automatically on deployment of the Autonity Protocol Contract at network genesis. See [Protocol Contract Addresses](/concepts/architecture/#protocol-contract-account-addresses) for the address value.
```
